I] Shri Hari It
First Chapter
INTRODUCTION |

After the expiry of twelve years of exile and residing in an
unknown place for one year, the Pandavas demanded half of their
kingdom from Duryodhana, as was his promise but he refused to
give even as much land as could be covered by the point of a
needle, without waging war. The Pandavas sought permission from
their mother Kunti, and accepted.the challenge of a war. After this
decision, both the Kauravas and the Pandavas, began preparation for it.
Sage Veda Vyasa had great affection for Dhrtarastra, the blind
king of Hastinapura. Due to his affection, he said to Dhrtarastra,
“War and massacre of the Ksatriyas 1s inevitable. If you want to
see the scene of the battlefield, I can endow you with divine sight
so as to enable you to see scene of war, from the place you are
sitting.” Dhrtarastra said, “I have been blind all my life. Now I
don’t want to see the slaughter of my own kith and kin. But I
want to hear the details of the war.” Then sage Vyasa said,” I
endow Sanjaya with this divine sight by which he will know,
hear and see, not only the incidents of the battlefield but also
the ideas, in the minds of the warriors and will narrate these to
you.” Saying so, sage Vyasa endowed Safijaya with divine vision.
The battle started on the battlefield of Kuruksetra at the appointed
hour. Safijaya stayed in the battlefield, for ten days. When Bhisma
being badly wounded with arrows, fell off the chariot, Safijaya
conveyed the message to Dhrtarastra who at that time was in
Hastinapura. Hearing this news, Dhrtarastra was filled with great
sorrow and started to cry. Then he asked Sanjaya to narrate to him
all the details of the war. Upto the twenty-fourth chapter of the
Bhisma-Parva (section), Safjaya narrated the incidents of the war.* At
the beginning of the twenty-fifth chapter, Dhrtarastra asks Safiijaya—
* In the Mahabharata there are eighteen sections. In those sections there
are several sub-sections. In the Bhisma section there is this Bhagavadgita, a sub-
section which begins with the thirteenth chapter of the Bhisma section and ends

with the forty-second chapter.

2 SRIMADBHAGAVADGITA [Chapter 1.
| FRITS Tarq*

qdata Heart waadat aya:

Watt: Wusayda fang AST Ne i

dhrtarastra uvaca

dharmaksetre kuruksetre samaveta yuyutsavah

mamakah pandavascaiva kimakurvata sanjaya

Dhrtarastra said: .

O SajijayaT, assembled at the holy-field of Kuruksetra, eager
to fight, what did my sons and the sons of Pandu, do? 1

| Comment:—

‘Dharmaksetre kuruksetre’-—In Kuruksetra the gods
performed holy sacrifice. King Kuru also performed penance
there. Thus being saturated with a spiritual atmosphere, the
field of Kuruksetra has been called the field of righteousness
(Dharmaksetra).

Here by the word ‘Ksetra’ in “‘Dharmaksetra’ and “Kuruksetra’
Dhrtarastra means to say that this is the land of the Kurus. This
is not merely a battlefield, but a land of pilgrimage, in which
human beings by performing holy actions, can attain benediction
in this life. Therefore, by consulting noble persons, this land has
been chosen, for both mundane and ultra mundane benefits.

In this world generally, there are three root causes of
disputes viz., land, wealth and woman. Out of these three, the
kings primarily fight for land. Hence, there is the significance
of the name ‘Kuruksetra’ here. In the Kuru-family the sons of
Dhrtarastra, as well as, those of Pandu, are included. Therefore,
both of them have an equal claim over the land of Kuru. But

* Within the dialogue between VaiSampayana and Janamejaya there is the
dialogue between Dhrtarastra and Safijaya; and within the dialogue between
Dhrtarastra and Sajfijaya there is the dialogue between Si Krsna and Arjuna.

‘ss F Safijaya was born of Gavalgana. He possessed knowledge and
righteousness like sages. He was Dhrtarastra’s minister (Mahabharata Adi. 63/97).

Verse 1] SADHAKA-SANJIVANI 3
the Kauravas refuse to give the Pandavas their share of land, so
war between them becomes inevitable.

Though the word “Kuruksetra’ is fair and justified, because
the land belongs to both the cousin groups, yet Indian culture,
is so unique that righteousness is given top priority in it.
Therefore, even an action such as war, is performed on the field
of righteousness—a land of pilgrimage, so that the warriors may
attain salvation. Therefore, the word ‘Dharmaksetra’, has been
used along with ‘Kuruksetra’ here.

There is one more point, which needs attention. In the first
verse of the first chapter of the Gita, the first word is ‘Dharma’,
and in the last verse of the eighteenth chapter the last word is
‘Mama’. Therefore, if ‘Dhar’ is taken from the first word and ‘Ma’
from the last word, the word becomes ‘Dharma’ (righteousness).
Therefore, the whole of the Gita, comes within nghteousness viz.,
by following the path of righteousness, the principles of the Gita
are followed, and by discharging one’s duty according to the
doctrines of the Gita, the path of righteousness, is followed.

From these words “‘dharmaksetre kuruksetre’ all of us should
know that all actions should be performed by following the path
of righteousness. Every action, should be performed, not with
a selfish motive, but for the welfare of all, and the scriptures
should be the authority in determining what ought to be done
and what ought not to be done (Gita 16/24).

‘Samaveti yuyutsavah’—Duryodhana did not accept the peace
negotiations despite repeated proposals from many kings. Nay,
when Lord Krsna came to intervene as a mediator, Duryodhana
bluntly refused to part with, even as much land as could be covered
by the point of a needle, without waging a war (Mahabharata,
Udyoga. 127/25). Thus, Pandavas had no alternative but to
fight. Thus the two groups assembled to fight for their rights.

Though the two groups assembled to fight, yet Duryodhana
had a keener desire for war, in order to usurp the kingdom by
fair means or foul, just means or unjust viz., by hook or crook.

4 SRIMADBHAGAVADGITA [Chapter 1
Thus his side was very keen to wage a war.

The Pandavas, had the virtue of righteousness on their side.
For the sake of justice, they were prepared to face any hardship.
Knowing the deadly consequences of a war, Yudhisthira did not
want to indulge in it. But, as by obeying their mother, the five
Pandavas had married Draupadi, Yudhisthira by obeying his

_ mother, became willing to fight.* Thus, Duryodhana, and the
members of his group were eager to fight for usurping the kingdom,
while the Pandavas, were compelled to fight for righteousness.

‘Mamakah pandavascaiva’—The Pandavas, regarded Dhrtarastra
(being the elder brother of their father) as their father, and obeyed
his order, whether it was just or unjust. Therefore, here the word
‘Mamakah’ includes both the Kauravas and the Pandavasf. But
the word ‘Pandava’, has been mentioned separately, because
Dhrtarastra was not fair and just to the Pandavas. He was not.
impartial, he had partiality for his sons. So the word ‘Mamakah’,
has been used for his sons, while ‘Pandava’ has been used for the

* Kunti, the mother of the five Pandavas was very forbearing. She had a

| unique personality. She did not desire worldly pleasures and kingdom. She asked
Lord Krsna to grant her the boon of adversity. But there were two things which
always pinched her. The first of them was that villains such as Duryodhana etc.,
wanted to make her beloved daughter-in-law naked in the assembly. This insulting,
hateful and inhuman behaviour pained her very much. |

Secondly when Lord Krsna on behalf of the Pandavas went to Hastinapura
with a proposal of conciliation, Duryodhana, Duh4sana, Karna and Sakuni etc.,

~ wanted to arrest Him. Hearing this incident, Kunti thought that those villains should
, be killed, otherwise their increasing sins would lead them to damnation. It was
because of these two factors that Kunti ordered her sons, the Pandavas to fight.

+ Though the term ‘Kaurava’ includes both Duryodhana etc., the sons
of Dhrtarastra as well as Yudhisthira etc., the sons of Pandu, yet in this verse
Dhrtarastra has used the term ‘Pandava’ for Yudhisthira etc. So the term “Kaurava’
stands for Duryodhana etc.

+ Dhrtarastra had a partial outlook because he thought that Duryodhana etc.,
were his sons while Yudhisthira etc., were Pandu’s sons. So he never checked
Duryodhana from committing evil deeds such as poisoning Bhima and throwing
him into the water, trying to burn the Pandavas alive in the house made of lac,
gambling with Yudhisthira by foul means, sending an army to the forest to destroy

Verse 1] SADHAKA-SANIJIVANI 5
sons of Pandu. Thus, his feelings find expression in his speech.
It was because of his partial attitude, that he had to suffer the
torture of the destruction of his family. Therefore, every human
being should learn a lesson, that he should not be partial to
members of his house, street, village, province, country and sect,
because partiality leads to conflict, rather than love and goodwill.

The term ‘Eva’ (also), with the term ‘Pandavah’ has
been used to point out the fact, that the Pandavas should not
have waged war because they were righteous to the core. But
they also came to the battlefield, to wage war. So what did
they do there?

{‘Mamakah’ and ‘Pandavah’*—Sanjaya will explain the .
word ‘mamakah’, from the second to the thirteenth verses to |
Dhrtarastra. Seeing the army of the Pandavas, his son Duryodhana
told Dronacarya, the names of the chief generals of the Pandava-
army, in order to cause hatred in his mind against the Pandavas.
After that, Duryodhana named the principal warriors of his army,
praised their skill in warfare. In order to please and cheer up
Duryodhana, Bhisma blew his conch loudly. Hearing the sound
of his conch, the conchs and trumpets etc., of the Kaurava-
army blared forth. Then, from the fourteenth to the nineteenth
verses, Safijaya explains the word ‘Pandavah’, as was asked
by Dhrtaradstra. He says, Krsna, a supporter of the Pandavas,
seated in a chariot, blew his conch. After him Arjuna, Bhima,
Yudhisthira, Nakula and Sahadeva etc., also blew their conchs.
The terrible sound of those conchs rent the hearts of the army
of Duryodhana. After that Safijaya, while talking about the
Pandavas, starts the dialogue between Sri Krsna and Arjuna,
from the twentieth verse. ]
the Pandavas and so on. The reason was that Dhrtarastra had the feeling that
somehow or the other if the Pandavas were killed, his sons would rule over the
whole empire. |

* Describing ‘Mamakah’ and ‘Pandavah’ separately Safijaya uses the words
‘Duryodhana’ (1/2) and ‘Pandavah’ (1/14).

6 SRIMADBHAGAVADGITA [Chapter 1

‘Kimakurvata’—‘Kim’ , has three meanings—doubt, reproach
(blame) and question. : 7

The incident of the war cannot be doubted, because after
ten days of fighting when Bhisma fell off the chariot, Safijaya
conveyed the message to Dhrtarastra, at Hastinapura.

There cannot be reproach (blame) also because Dhrtarastra
did not blame his sons and the Pandavas, for the war, when the
war was already going on. |

Therefore ‘Kim’ means a question here. Dhrtarastra questions _
Sanjaya to relate him all the incidents in details, and in sequence
so that he may understand them properly.

| Appendix—‘My sons’ (mamakah) and ‘Pandu’s sons’
(Pandavah)—this distinction caused attachment—aversion which
led to war and commotion (stir). The result of .Dhrtarastra’s
attachment-aversion was that all the hundred Kauravas were
killed while even a single Pandava was not killed.

As curd is churned, a stir is caused in it by which butter
is extracted, similarly the stir caused by the distinction between
‘my sons’ (mamakah) and ‘Pandu’s sons’ (pandavah) caused
yearning for benediction in Arjuna’s mind by which butter in
the form of the Gita came into light.

It means that the commotion produced in Dhrtarastra’s mind
caused war while the commotion produced in Arjuna’s mind
revealed the Gita.

Link:—Then Sanjaya answers his question—

TAT FATT
Get I Wusariteh ae catereqar
Was UST AMAA? tt
sanjaya uvaca
_ drstva tu pandvanikam vyidham duryodhanastada
acaryamupasangamya raja vacanamabravit —

Verse 2] SADHAKA-SANJIVANI 7
Safijaya said; :

At that time, seeing the army of the Pandavas drawn up in
battle array, approaching Dronacarya, prince Duryodhana, spoke
the following words. 2
Comment:—

‘Tada’—‘“Tada’, means the time when both the armies
were arrayed and Dhrtarastra was very much anxious to hear
the account of the battlefield.

‘Tu’—Dhrtarastra put the question about his sons and the
sons of Pandu. So Safijaya uses the word ‘Tu’, to tell Dhrtarastra
first about his sons. |

‘Drstva* pandavanikam vyidham’—It means that the army
of the Pandavas was arrayed in good order viz., the warriors

| had no difference in their opinionT. Righteousness, and Lord
Krsna, were in their favour. Therefore, the Pandavas, though
fewer in number, had greater impact. Seeing their army arrayed,
Duryodhana was also influenced. So he, approaching Dronacarya,
spoke prudent and serious words.

‘Raja Duryodhanah’—Duryodhana was called ‘Raja’, the king,
because Dhrtarastra had the greatest attachment and affection for
Duryodhana. Moreover, Duryodhana was the prince. He looked
after the affairs of the empire, while Dhrtarastra was only the
nominal head. Duryodhana was the main cause of the warfare
also. It was because of all these factors, that he was called king
by Safjaya.

* In this chapter the term ‘Drstva’ has been used three times—seeing the
Pandava-army, Duryodhana approaches Dronacarya (1/2); seeing the Kaurava- -
army, Arjuna lifts his bow (1/20); seeing his kith and kin, Arjuna is filled with
extreme passion (1/28). In the first two cases the term ‘Drstva’ has been used for
seeing the army while the third time it has been used for seeing the kith and kin
which changes Arjuna’s feeling.

t There was a difference of opinions inthe Katirava-army because Duryodhana
and Duhsasana etc., wanted to wage the war. But Bhisma, Drona and Vikarna
did not want. And there is a rule that where there is difference in opinions, there
vigour subsides. :

8 SRIMADBHAGAVADGITA [Chapter 1

‘Acaryamupasangamya’—It seems, that there were three
reasons why Duryodhana approached Dronacarya:—

(i) He went for his selfish interest, so that he could arouse
ill-will in Dronacarya’s heart, against the Pandavas and Dronacarya
might be specially partial to his army. |

(11) It was proper on his part to go to Dronacarya, to express
his regard for him, because he was his preceptor. |

(iii) It is very significant, for the chief warrior not to leave his
position otherwise the whole order of the army is disturbed. So,
it was proper on the part of Duryodhana, to go to Dronacarya.

| Here a question may be raised that, Duryodhana should have
first of all approached Bhisma because Bhisma was the commander
supreme. Then, why did he approach Dronacarya? The answer
is, that Drona and Bhisma both loved the Pandavas, and the
Kauravas, but Drona had special kindness and love for Arjuna.
Moreover, Duryodhana had a pupil-preceptor relationship with
Drona, but he had no family relationship with him. Therefore,
it was proper on his part to go to Drona, to please him. In
practical life also it is seen that a man for his selfish interest,
tries to please a person who is not closely related to him, by
offering him regard. |

Duryodhana thought, that Bhisma was his grandfather. So
it was easy to please him, even if he was displeased, because
of his family relationship. So Bhisma, also loved him very
much. Bhisma, blew his conch loudly, to please and cheer up
Duryodhana (1/12).

‘Vacanamabravit’—Here, it was sufficient to use the word

' *Abravit’ (spoke), which also includes “Vacanam’ (words). So

: there was no need to use the word “Vacanam’. Even then,
the term “Vacanam’ has been used, which shows that Duryodhana

spoke prudent and meaningful words, in order to arouse ill-will

in Dronacarya’s heart, against the Pandavas and to win his
favour, so that he could fight whole-heartedly, on the Kauravas

Verse 3] SADHAKA-SANJIVANI 9

side and they would gain victory. Thus the term ‘“Vacanam’ was

used with a selfish motive. _ - |
CITESEER IOS |

Link:—Duryodhana approaching Drona speaks the following
words:— : - 7

asdat WVegqaonaraed wedt aa

qt saaqaut aa fre aia

pasyaitarh panduputranamacarya mahatim camiim

vyidham drupadaputrena tava Sisyena dhimata —

Behold, O Master, this mighty army of the sons of Pandu,
arrayed for battle by your talented pupil Dhrstadyumna, the son
of Drupada. 3 . |
Comment: -

‘Acarya’—-By addressing Drona as ‘Acarya’, it seems that
Duryodhana means to say that he is the preceptor, who taught
the Kauravas and the Pandavas, the science of warfare. So he
should not be partial, to either of the groups. .

‘Tava Sisyena dhimata—By this phrase Duryodhana means,
that Drona is so simple hearted, that he has taught the science
of warfare to Dhrstadyumna, Drupada’s son, who is born to
kill him (Drona), and who is so clever, that he is determined to
vanquish and kill none other than, his own preceptor. |

‘Drupadaputrena’—It means that Drupada, with the motive
of getting your honour killed, got a holy sacrifice performed, by
the two Brahmanas (men of the priest-class) named, Yaja and
Upayaja, and thus Dhrstadyumna, was born. The same Dhrstadyumna
was standing before him, as commander of the rival army.

Though Duryodhana, could speak the word Dhrstadyumna
instead of ‘Drupadaputra’, the son of Drupada, yet he intentionally
used “‘Drupadaputrena’, to remind Dronacarya of the enmity that
Drupada, had with him. So he really meant that it was a good

10 SRIMADBHAGAVADGITA [Chapter 1
opportunity, to take a revenge. | : -

‘Panduputranam, etam vyidham mahatim camiim paSya’—
Behold the mighty army of the Pandavas, arrayed for battle by
the son of Drupada. It means that Duryodhana wants to say, “O
master, the Pandavas, whom you love, have made the son of
Drupada, the general of their army so that he may kill you. Had
they loved you, they would never have appointed him as a general.”

Though the army of the Kauravas, was larger than that of
the Pandavas, the army of the Kauravas was eleven ‘Aksauhini*,
while that of the Pandavas was only seven ‘Aksauhini’, yet
the army of the Pandavas seemed to Duryodhana, larger than
what it actually was. The army of the Pandavas, seemed more
formidable to Duryodhana because:—

(i) It was arrayed in such a manner, that even a small army
seemed larger to Duryodhana. | _

(ii) All the warriors of the Pandavas army, were united and
of one mind. So it seemed greater in strength and enthusiasm.

Drawing Drona’s attention to the army of the Pandavas,
Duryodhana wants to say to Dronacarya, that he should not regard
the army of the rival group as ordinary (small). He should fight
with all his might. and it would not be difficult for him to defeat
the son of Drupada, because he was his pupil. _.

‘Etarn paSya’, means that the army of the Pandavas 1s arrayed
for the battle. So you should take a quick decision how to get
victory over them. 3

. PIERS |

Link:—After requesting Dronacarya, to behold the army of
the Pandavas, Duryodhana shows him the chariot-warriors of
the army, of the Pandavas.

* One ‘Aksauhini' army consists of 21,870 chariots, 21,870 elephants, 65,610
horses and 1,09,350 foot-soldiers (Mahabharata, Adi. 2/23—26). .

Verse 4—6] SADHAKA-SANJIVANI 11
at YT Besar Miasfraar afer
qaart fawreya goes AST: Ws
yshdvatnan: HiPnrsiva dalart |

Getiepharsya sears ATES: 1G I
qa fear Sasa stetary |

arast gracaga ae wa Aare: et

atra sura mahesvasa bhimarjunasama = yudhi

yuyudhano virataSca drupadasca maharathah
dhrstaketuScekitanah kasirajasca viryavan
purujitkuntibhojasca SaibyaSca narapungavah
yudhamanyusca vikranta uttamaujasca viryavan
saubhadro draupadeyasca sarva eva maharathah

There (in the army of the Pandavas) are mighty archers, peers
in warfare like heroic Arjuna and Bhima, such as Satyaki and
Virata and the great chariot-warrior Drupada. Dhrstaketu, Cekitana,
the valiant king of Kasi, Purujit, Kuntibhoja and Saibya, the best
of men, are also there. Mighty Yudhamanyu, valiant Uttamauja,
Abhimanyu, the son of Subhadra and the five sons of Draupadi,
are also there. All of them are great chariot-warriors. 4—6
Comment:— - .

‘Atra §ira mahesvasa bhimarjunasama yudhi’—Those who
possess large bows and shoot with bows and arrows, are called
‘Mahesvasa (the mighty archers). They are very valiant and
extraordinary warriors. In warfare, they are as strong as Bhima,
and in the use of weapons and missiles such as bows and arrows
etc., as good as Arjuna.

‘Yuyudhanah’—Yuyudhana (Satyaki), learnt the science of
warfare, from Arjuna. Thus he was obliged to him, that he did
not go to the side of Duryodhana, even though Lord Krsna had
given Duryodhana, his Narayani army. In order to arouse malice
in the mind of Dronacarya,. Duryodhana, first of all, mentions

12 SRIMADBHAGAVADGITA [Chapter ]
the name of Yuyudhana, the disciple to Arjuna. He means to
say, “You have taught Arjuna archery and granted him the
boon that you would try that he would be a matchless archer,
in this world (Mahabharata, Adi. 131/27). Thus you have so
much love for him. But he is so ungrateful, that he is arrayed
in the army against you, while Arjuna’s disciple Yuyudhana is
arrayed. on his side.” : |

[Yuyudhana was not killed in the warfare but in a mutual
fight-among the Yadavas.}

‘Virata$ca’—Duryodhana says, “It was Virata, who was
responsible for insulting the warrior, Susarma. Again, it
was because of him, that you became unconscious with the
Sammohana (beguiling) weapon, and we had to flee from the
battlefield, leaving behind his cows. The same king Virata is
opposing you.”

Dronacarya had no enmity or malice against king Virata. But
Duryodhana thinks that if he names Drupada after Yuyudhana,
Dronacarya may think, that Duryodhana is instigating him to
fight against the Pandavas, and he is arousing feelings of enmity
with them. So Duryodhana names Virata before Drupada, so that
Dronacarya may not see through his trick, and may fight bravely.

[King Virata and his three sons, named Uttara, Sveta, Sankha
were killed, in the war of Mahabharata. ]

‘Drupadasca maharathah—Duryodhana says, “You reminded
Drupada of your old friendship but he insulted you in the assembly,
saying that he was a king and you a beggar, and thus there was
no question of any friendship between him and you, and beget a
son who would kill you. The same great chariot-warrior, named
Drupada is arrayed to fight against you.”

[King Drupada, was killed in the warfare by Dronacarya.]

‘Dhrstaketuh’—How foolish this Dhrstaketu is, that he is
fighting on the side of Sri Krsna, who killed his father Sisupala,

Verse 4—6] SADHAKA-SANJIVANI 13
with a disc, in the assembly. :

[Dhrstaketu was killed by Dronacarya.]

‘Cekitanah’— The entire yadava-army is ready to fight on our
side, but that solitary yadava is fighting on the side of Pandavas.

{Cekitana was killed by Duryodhana.]

‘Kasirajasca viryavan’—This king of Kasi is very valiant, a
great chariot-warrior and is fighting on the side of the Pandavas,
so be careful, as you have a very formidable foe to deal with.

[The king of Kasi was killed, in the battle of Mahabharata. ]

‘Purujitkuntibhojasca°—Though both Puryjit and Kuntibhoja,

| being Kunti’s brothers, are maternal uncles to us and the Pandavas,
yet being partial, they are arrayed to fight against us.

[Purujit and Kuntibhoja—both were killed at the hands of
Dronacarya. } : :

__-‘Saibyagca narapungavah’—Saibya is the father-in-law to
Yudhisthira. He is noble and very powerful. He is also our
relative, but he is on the side of the Pandavas..—

Yudhamanyusca __vikranta uttamaujasca viryavan’—
Yudhamanyu and Uttamauja, who are very strong and valiant
warriors of Paficala country, have been assigned the task of
protecting the wheels of my enemy Arjuna’s chariot. So keep
an eye on them. |

{[Yudhamanyu and Uttamauja, were slain in their sleep, by
A&svatthama. ] |

‘Saubhadrah’—He is Abhimanyu, the son to Krsna’s sister
named Subhadra. He is very brave. He learnt the art of piercing
an array of soldiers, standing in the form of a circle, while he
was in his mother’s womb. So beware of him. :

[Abhimanyu was killed by Duhsasana’s son, when he unjustly
hit him, with a mace on the head.]

‘Draupadeyasca’—Draupadi, gave birth to five sons named

14 SRIMADBHAGAVADGITA [Chapter 1
Prativindhya, Sutasoma, Srutakarma, Satanika and Srutasena
respectively, from Yudhisthira, Bhima, Arjuna, Nakula and
Sahadeva. Watch her five sons, carefully. She openly insulted me
in the assembly. So avenge that insult, by killing her five sons.

[Asvatthama killed the five sons, while they were asleep at night. ]

‘Sarva eva maharathah’—All of them are great chariot-
wattiors. They are well-versed in the scripture and in the use
of arms (A great chariot-warrior is, one who can manage ten
thousand archers). There is a large number of such great chariot-
warriors, in the army of the Pandavas.

Link:—Duryodhana described valour, bravery and skill of
the army of the Pandavas, in warfare so that hatred might be
aroused in Dronacarya, against the Pandavas, and he might be

| full of greater zeal. But, then a second thought came to his mind,

that Drona was at heart partial to the Pandavas. So he might

make a peace-treaty, with the Pandavas. As soon as, this thought

| came to his mind,he described the heroes of his side, who were
very well trained in warfare, in the next three verses.

stare @ fafsrst & afrarer fasta t

ATH AA VAT UsaTa ATA ST Ut

asmakam tu visista ye tannibodha dvijottama

nayaka mama sainyasya sanhjiartham tanbravimi te

O best of the twice-born (Brahmana), know the principal |
warriors, the generals of my army also; I name them for your
information. 7 , |
Comment:— .

'Asmakam tu visista ye tannibodha dvijottama'—Duryodhana
says to Dronacarya, "O best of the twice-born, you should know
that in our army also, there are great chariot-warriors, who are

Verse 7} SADHAKA-SANJIVANI - 15
in no way less valiant and less trained in warfare, rather they
are more valiant and better trained.” -

In the third verse ‘Pasya’, and here ‘Nibodha' verbs, are used
because the army of the Pandavas is standing in front of them,
therefore Duryodhana uses the verb 'PaSya’ (behold). But the army
of Kauravas, is not in front of Dronacarya, it is on the side of
his back. So Duryodhana, uses the verb 'Nibodha' (Know).

‘Nayakaé mama sainyasya safijhartham tanbravimi te'—I
mention the names of the chief generals, marshals and great
chariot-warriors of my army, to draw your attention to them.

‘Saiijiiartham’ means, that there are innumerable generals,
who cannot be named easily. Therefore, I am just drawing your
attention, as you know all of them.

In this verse, Duryodhana probably wants to say, that his |
side is in no way weaker than that of the Pandavas, but is rather
stronger, yet according to political prudence however weak the
army of an enemy may be; it should not be regarded as weak.
Therefore, one should not have in the least, a feeling of neglect
and indifference, towards the enemy. So Duryodhana already
described the warriors of the other side, to make Drona careful
and now he is giving the names of the warriors of his army.

Secondly, after seeing the army of the Pandavas compact
and well disciplined, Duryodhana was overawed and also
somewhat afraid. The reason was, that in spite of being smaller
there were several righteous persons, and as also Lord Krsna
Himself, in that army. Righteous persons and God bear their
influence on all the creatures, including those having the most
sinful conduct, and even on animals, birds, trees and plants. The
reason is, that God and righteousness are eternal, while all the
temporal powers are transient. Therefore, Duryodhana is also
influenced by the army of the Pandavas. But because of the
material and temporal power, he wants to assure Dronacarya,
that their army is superior to that of the Pandavas. Therefore,
they can easily gain victory over the army, of the Pandavas.

PIOISSEES OS

16 SRIMADBHAGAVADGITA [Chapter 1
varie Higa Haye aafasaa: |
sain faavivsd Gaeta ST UN
bhavanbhismasca karna$ca krpasca samitifijayah
asvatthama vikarnaSca saumadattistathaiva ca
Yourself, Bhisma, Karna and Krpa ever victorious in battle;

and ASvatthama, Vikarna and Saumadatti (Bhirisrava), the son

of Somadatta. 8 |

Comment:— |
'Bhavanbhismasca'—You and Bhisma both are unique. So if

you fight with your full vigour, neither the gods, genies, devils,

nor men can encounter you. Both of you are famous for your
valour throughout the world. Bhisma has been a celibate since
birth and he cannot be killed, without his own will. |
[In the Mahabharata, Dronacarya was killed by Dhrstadyumna,
while Bhisma died during summer solstice, of his own free will.]
'Karnasca'—Karna is very brave. I believe, that he by himself
can gain a victory over the army of the Pandavas. Even Arjuna,
is no match for. him. Such a valiant warrior is standing on our

‘side. 7
[Karna was killed by Arjuna, in the war of Mahabharata.]

-'Krpasca samitifijayah'—Krpa, is immortal.* He is our well-
wisher and can gain victory over the whole army of the Pandavas.

Though Duryodhana, after mentioning the names of Dronacarya

and Bhisma, should have named Krpacarya. Yet, Duryodhana

had more faith in Karna, than in Krpacarya. So Karna's name
was spontaneously uttered by him. But he wanted to please

Dronacarya and Bhisma by calling Krpacarya, as ever victorious

in battle, lest they should regard it as an insult to Krpacarya.
'‘ASvatthama'—He is also immortal. Being your son, he is
* Agvatthama, Bali, Vedavyasa, Hanuman, Vibhisana, Krpa (Krpacarya),

Parasurama and Markandeya—these eight are immortal. In the scripture it

is written.

